[Music]
seven American black chamber
not everyone within the federal
intelligence community however succumbed
to the pronouncements of idyllic world
peace in the aftermath of the European
conflagration which witnessed the
collapse of the Habsburg Hohenzollern
the Romanov empires footnote the lust
for world peace was apparent in the
organization of the League of Nations
and the treaties resulting from the
Washington armament conference of 1921
and 1922 it reached its zenith in 1928
with the curious kellogg-briand pact
which outlawed war simultaneous with
these developments were embittering
encroachments and manipulations of the
economics and politics of the recently
defeated central powers by certain
victors in the world war ambitions of
empire by the Japanese in the Pacific
and the rise of totalitarian regimes in
both Europe and Asia and footnote for
some with intelligence responsibilities
the war had brought their organizations
into full flower and provided an
opportunity to scrutinize the
intelligence capabilities of both Ally
and enemy thus there was an
unwillingness to return to pre-war
intelligence infancy and it was this
climate of opinion which fostered the
creation of the secret crypt analysis
structure which came to be known as the
American black chamber born in April
1889 in Worthington Indiana Herbert
Yardley had wanted to become a criminal
lawyer but after learning the skills of
a telegraph operator he came to the
State Department in 1913 and imbued with
a strong sense of history and penchant
for deciphering masked communications he
soon discovered that existing American
codes could be easily broken
footnote C David Kahn the code breakers
revised edition new york new american
library 1973 pages 167 and 168 herbert o
Yardley the American black Chamber
London Faber and Faber 1931 pages 3
through 11
in footnote having attempted with little
effect to encourage improvements in the
diplomatic codes Yardley obtained a
commission in the army at the time of
United States entry into world
hostilities and went to work for Ralph
Van Diemen and the military intelligence
division within the War Department
he organized and directed the
cryptographic Bureau which eventually
became mi-8 in August 1918 he sailed for
England where he studied British
cryptographic and decoding methods and
then went on to Paris to assist the
American delegation to the peace
conference in April 1919 Yardley
returned to the United States for the
scaling down of military intelligence
for peacetime conditions quote after
several conferences with responsible
officials of the state war and navy
departments we decided to demobilize the
shorthand subsection demobilized the
secret ink subsection transfer the code
compilation subsection to the Signal
Corps Army regulations required the
Signal Corps to compile codes and
restore military intelligence
communications to the adjutant general
of the army this then left only the code
and cipher solution section my estimate
for an efficient cipher Bureau called
for $100,000 per annum the State
Department agreed to turn over to
military intelligence $40,000 per annum
out of special funds provided the Navy
department was entirely excluded for
they refused to share their secrets with
the Navy
this left a deficit of $60,000 which
military intelligence managed to obtain
from Congress after taking some of the
leaders into their confidence I was told
that there was a joker in the Department
of State special funds they could not
legally be expended within the District
of Columbia since it seemed that we
could not remain in the District of
Columbia I was commissioned to go back
to New York and find a suitable place
where the famous American black chamber
could bury itself from the prying eyes
of foreign governments end quote
on the first of October the unit set up
initial operations at three East 38th
Street in Manhattan a former town house
owned by T Suffern Taylor a New York
Society figure and political leader
quote it stayed there little more than a
year however before moving to new
quarters in a four-story brownstone at
141 East 37th Street just east of
Lexington Avenue it occupied half of the
ornate divided structure whose high
ceilings did little to relieve the
claustrophobic construction of its 12
foot wide rooms Yardley's apartment was
on the top floor all external connection
with the government was cut rent Heat
office supplies light Yardley's salary
of $7,500 a year and the salaries of his
staff were paid from secret funds though
the office was a branch of the Military
Intelligence Division War Department
payments did not begin until June 30th
1921 end quote all employees were
relegated to civilian status the mission
quote we were to read the secret code
and cipher diplomatic telegrams of
foreign governments by such means as we
could if we were caught it would be just
too bad end quote
materials first came to the unit in the
form of documents held by the State
Department Japanese secret codes were of
special interest during the Washington
armament conference of 1921 and 1922 the
unit made over 5,000 decipherment and
translations according to Yardley's own
reminiscences quote we solved over
45,000 cryptograms from 1917 to 1929 and
at one time or another we broke the
codes of Argentina Brazil Chile China
Costa Rica Cuba England France Germany
Japan Liberia Mexico Nicaragua Panama
Peru Russia San Salvador Santo Domingo
Soviet Union and Spain we also made
preliminary analyses of the
of many other governments this we did
because we never knew at what moment a
crisis would arise which would require
quick solution of a particular
government's diplomatic telegrams our
personnel was limited and we could not
hope to read the telegrams of all
nations but we drew up plans for an
offensive in the form of code analyses
even though we anticipated no crisis we
never knew at what moment to expect a
telephone call or an urgent letter
demanding a prompt solution of messages
which we had never dreamed would
interest the Department of State end
quote
by the late 1920s the black chamber had
gained access to diplomatic telegraph
traffic through cooperative arrangements
with the Western Union Telegraph Company
and the postal Telegraph company in 1929
with the arrival of the new
administration Yardley upon hearing
Herbert Hoover's first presidential
address to the nation since the high
moralism
had gripped government leadership a
moralism which would not tolerate the
continuance of the black chamber shortly
after the new Secretary of State Henry L
Stimson took office a series of
important code messages deciphered by
the black chamber was forwarded to
acquaint the secretary with the
existence and activities of the
cryptanalysis operation the reaction was
the one anticipated by Yardley quote
Stimson was shocked to learn of the
existence of the black chamber and
totally disapproved of it he regarded it
as a low snooping activity a sneaking
spying keyhole peering kind of dirty
business a violation of the principle of
mutual trust upon which he conducted
both his personal affairs and his
foreign policy all of this it is and
Stimson rejected the view that such
means justified even patriotic ends he
held to the conviction that his country
should do what is right and as he said
later gentlemen do not read each other's
mail in an act of pure moral courage
Stimson affirming principle over
expediency withdrew all State Department
fun
from the support of the Black Chamber
since these constituted its major income
their loss shuttered the office
Hoover's speech had warned Yardley that
an appeal would be fruitless there was
nothing to do but close up shop
an unexpected 6666 dollars and 66 cents
and the organization's files reverted to
the signal Court where William Friedman
had charge of cryptology the staff
quickly dispersed none went to the army
and when the books were closed on
October 31st 1929 the American Black
Chamber had perished it had cost the
State Department two hundred thirty
thousand four hundred and four dollars
and the War Department 98 thousand eight
hundred and eight and forty nine cents
just under a third of a million dollars
for a decade of crypt analysis end quote
Yardley could not find work in
Washington and returned to his family
home in Worthington where the Depression
quickly devoured his existing resources
out of financial desperation he said
about writing the story of the Black
Chamber serializing portions of the
account in The Saturday Evening Post and
then producing a book for bobbs-merrill
in June 1931 though the volume was an
instant success
it was denounced by both the state and
war departments in all it sold 17,000
931 copies in America and appeared in
French Swedish an unauthorized Chinese
version and in Japanese in the Land of
the Rising Sun the book quadrupled
American sales with 33,000 119 copies
sold amidst much outrage over its
revelations Yardley was already at work
on a second expose entitled Japanese
diplomatic secrets an account utilizing
Japanese diplomatic cables transmitted
during the 1921 and 1922 naval
disarmament conference when the State
Department learned of his efforts and
subsequently quote United States
Marshals seized the manuscript On
February 20th 1933 at the
of the milling company to whom Yardley
had submitted it after bobbs-merrill had
declined it on the grounds that it
violated a statute prohibiting agents of
the United States government from
appropriating secret documents end quote
Yardley next turned his attention to
writing fiction at which he proved
moderately successful and some real
estate speculation in Queens New York in
1938 he was hired by Chiang kai-shek at
about ten thousand dollars a year to
solve the messages of the Japanese who
were then invading China two years later
he returned to the United States where
he made a brief effort at being a
Washington restaurateur attempted to
establish a cryptanalytic Bureau in
Canada though Stimson and/or the British
forced the reluctant Canadian government
to dispense with his services and then
served as an enforcement officer in the
food division of the office of Price
Administration until the end of World
War two after the war he turned to his
old card-playing Talent and offered
instruction in poker out of this
experience came another book the
education of a poker player which
appeared in 1957 a year later in August
he died of a stroke at his Silver Spring
Maryland home
[Music]
this is our hidden history